PAGE 1
A Combined Eddy-Diffusivity Mass-Flux Approach for the Convective Boundary Layer
A. PIER SIEBESMA
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), De Bilt, Netherlands
PEDRO M. M. SOARES
University of Lisbon, CGUL, IDL, and Department of Civil Engineering, Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa,
Lisbon, Portugal
JOÃO TEIXEIRA
NATO Undersea Research Centre, La Spezia, Italy
(Manuscript received 29 July 2005, in final form 1 July 2006)
ABSTRACT
A better conceptual understanding and more realistic parameterizations of convective boundary layers in
climate and weather prediction models have been major challenges in meteorological research. In particu-
lar, parameterizations of the dry convective boundary layer, in spite of the absence of water phase-changes
and its consequent simplicity as compared to moist convection, typically suffer from problems in attempting
to represent realistically the boundary layer growth and what is often referred to as countergradient fluxes.
The eddy-diffusivity (ED) approach has been relatively successful in representing some characteristics of
neutral boundary layers and surface layers in general. The mass-flux (MF) approach, on the other hand, has
been used for the parameterization of shallow and deep moist convection. In this paper, a new approach
that relies on a combination of the ED and MF parameterizations (EDMF) is proposed for the dry
convective boundary layer. It is shown that the EDMF approach follows naturally from a decomposition of
the turbulent fluxes into 1) a part that includes strong organized updrafts, and 2) a remaining turbulent field.
At the basis of the EDMF approach is the concept that nonlocal subgrid transport due to the strong updrafts
is taken into account by the MF approach, while the remaining transport is taken into account by an ED
closure. Large-eddy simulation (LES) results of the dry convective boundary layer are used to support the
theoretical framework of this new approach and to determine the parameters of the EDMF model. The
performance of the new formulation is evaluated against LES results, and it is shown that the EDMF closure
is able to reproduce the main properties of dry convective boundary layers in a realistic manner. Further-
more, it will be shown that this approach has strong advantages over the more traditional countergradient
approach, especially in the entrainment layer. As a result, this EDMF approach opens the way to param-
eterize the clear and cumulus-topped boundary layer in a simple and unified way.
1. Introduction
The traditional way to parameterize turbulent trans-
port in the atmospheric boundary layer is through an
eddy-diffusivity approach. This method estimates the
vertical turbulent flux w of a field  as the product of
the local gradient of the mean value of  and an eddy-
diffusivity coefficient K. One well-known drawback of
this method is that it cannot adequately describe an
upward turbulent heat flux in the upper part of the
convective boundary layer, where often a slightly stable
potential temperature profile is observed. In order to
resolve this deficiency, the so-called countergradient
term has been introduced (Ertel 1942), which takes into
account the capability of rising plumes to ascent
counter to the mean gradient.
The most popular format that takes this effect into
account is the one proposed by Deardorff (1966),
which, when applied to the potential temperature , can
be written as
Corresponding author address: A. Pier Siebesma, Royal Neth-
erlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), P.O. Box 201, 3730 AE
De Bilt, Netherlands.
E-mail: siebesma@knmi.nl
1230
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64
DOI: 10.1175/JAS3888.1
© 2007 American Meteorological Society

PAGE 2
w  K

z  wNL;
wNL  K,
1
where all notation is conventional: w denotes the ver-
tical velocity, overbars indicate a spatial average,
primes deviations from these averages, and 	 quantifies
the effect of the nonlocal transport. This formulation
has been subject of numerous attempts to formally jus-
tify the nonlocal term 	 on the basis of second-order
equations (Deardorff 1972; Holtslag and Moeng 1991)
and interesting analytical quasi-steady solutions of this
form have been reported recently (Stevens 2000). All
these studies have concentrated exclusively on how the
nonlocal format (1) can faithfully reproduce the inter-
nal structure of the convective boundary layer, al-
though occasional claims have been made on how (1)
might influence the interaction between the boundary
layer and the free atmosphere (Holtslag et al. 1995;
Stevens 2000).
Our main objective is to introduce a novel way to
take into account the effect of strong thermals in the
convective boundary layer for use in climate and nu-
merical weather prediction (NWP) models. Contrary to
the previous mentioned studies, our emphasis will be
on developing a formulation that is also capable of re-
alistically ventilating heat and moisture into the free
atmosphere and, in the case of a cloudy boundary layer,
into the cloud layer aloft. In fact, the original motiva-
tion of this study arose from the need to design a uni-
fied parameterization of turbulent transport in the
cloud-topped boundary layer. State-of-the-art param-
eterizations suffer from the undesired situation that ad-
vective mass-flux parameterizations used for convective
transport in the cumulus cloud layer are usually
matched in an arbitrary and ad hoc manner with the
eddy-diffusivity approach in the subcloud layer. In or-
der to overcome this situation, we will propose a new
method that combines the advective mass-flux ap-
proach and the eddy-diffusivity method in a coherent
way, so that it paves the way for a unified parameter-
ization of turbulent transport in the cloud-topped
boundary layer. The whole concept is based on a sepa-
rate treatment of the organized strong updrafts and the
remaining turbulent field. The organized, strongly
skewed, and nonlocal updrafts are described by an ad-
vective mass-flux approach, whereas the remaining tur-
bulent part is represented by an eddy-diffusivity ap-
proach. The basic idea has been formulated in Sie-
besma and Teixeira (2000) and practical applications of
this approach to the cloud-topped boundary layer have
been discussed recently in Soares et al. (2004). The
main purpose of this paper is to formulate a theoretical
framework for this approach with the aid of LES re-
sults, to evaluate it and compare it with other standard
approaches.
The set up of this study is as follows. In section 2 we
introduce the basic concepts that will constitute our
approach; in section 3 we present LES results of a num-
ber of dry convective boundary layer cases that will be
used throughout this study. Section 4 will be dedicated
to the various closures of the parameterization scheme
using the LES results of section 2. In section 5, the
scheme will be evaluated and compared with other ap-
proaches. Perspectives and conclusions are presented in
section 6.
2. Problem formulation and basic concept of the
eddy-diffusivity mass-flux approach
The time evolution of a field  ∈{, q
} in the Bouss-
inesq approximation is described by

t  
w
z
 F,
2
where the first term on the right-hand side (rhs) de-
scribes the tendency due to turbulent mixing and con-
vection and the remaining term F contains all ten-
dency terms due to advection and diabatic processes. In
the absence of any diabatic processes and a zero mean
wind, the total tendency is simply described by the tur-
bulent flux divergence.
To parameterize the turbulent flux in the boundary
layer, we start by designing a separation between strong
organized updrafts and the remaining turbulence, such
as is sketched schematically in Fig. 1. To be more spe-
cific, we define this strong updraft as a fixed fractional
area au, say a few percent of the horizontal domain
under consideration, that contains the strongest upward
vertical velocities. We will make this notion more pre-
cise later in the paper. Subsequently, we can decom-
pose the total turbulent flux of any arbitrary variable 
without any approximation into three terms (Siebesma
and Cuijpers 1995)
w  auw
u  1  auw
e
 auwu  wu  e,
3
where the sub- and superscripts u and e refer to the
strong updrafts and the complementary environmental
part. The third term of the rhs of (3) is usually referred
to as the mass-flux contribution where a convective
mass flux can be defined as M  au(wu  w). If we now
make use of the fact that au K 1 we can neglect the first
term on the rhs of (3) and approximate e  , so that
(3) can be simplified to
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1231

PAGE 3
w  we  Mu  .
4
As we have now isolated the nonlocal transport
through the mass-flux term we make the final step in
approximating the remaining turbulent transport term
by an eddy-diffusivity approach:
w  K

z  Mu  .
5
All that is needed to put this eddy-diffusivity mass-flux
(EDMF) approach into gear is to obtain coefficients for
the eddy diffusivity, the mass flux, and a model for the
updraft fields. This will be the topic of section 4.
Before we proceed further with the practical imple-
mentation of this model, let us pause for a moment to
discuss the realism and motivation of the proposed two
scale separation in some more detail. Historically, the
mass-flux concept originates from the cloud modeling
community (Arakawa 1969; Yanai et al. 1973; Ogura
and Cho 1973; Betts 1973). This is not surprising when
realizing that the joint probability density function
(PDF) of w and any moist conserved variable  in the
cloud layer has a well-defined bimodal structure: one
peak that is associated with the strong updrafts in the
cloudy cores and a second maximum that is associated
with the cloud induced subsidence. This bimodal struc-
ture of the PDF, obviously the result of condensational
processes in the cloud layer, is exactly the reason that
the mass-flux concept works so well in the cloud layer.
That is to say that the second term of the rhs of (5) is a
good approximation of the turbulent flux in the cloud
layer. As a result, virtually all present moist convection
parameterizations utilize relation (5) and, moreover,
simply ignore the first term of the rhs of (5).
For the dry convective boundary layer, the situation
is rather different: the joint PDF of w and  only has
one maximum near (, w) (Wyngaard and Moeng
1992). Therefore, virtually all attempts to model turbu-
lent transport in the convective boundary layer with a
mass-flux approach utilize a decomposition in updrafts
(w  w) and downdrafts (w  w) (Chatfield and Brost
1987; Randall et al. 1992; Lappen and Randall 2001a;
Petersen et al. 1999; Wang and Albrecht 1990). One of
the reasons for this choice is probably that, for the dry
convective boundary layer, there is no other decompo-
sition for which the mass flux term in (5) gives a larger
contribution to the total flux.
In this study, we utilize a decomposition between
strong thermals and the remaining complementary part
and build an EDMF model on this. The motivation for
this approach is twofold. First, the dynamics of a ther-
mal is strongly nonlocal since its kinetic energy in the
upper part of the boundary layer is largely due to the
buoyancy production in the lower half of the boundary
layer. It is for this reason that an eddy-diffusivity ap-
proach based on the local gradient of the mean field is
inappropriate for this important transport mechanism.
A mass-flux concept is well capable of taking into ac-
count these nonlocal effects and hence we will apply
this concept to these thermals. Second, thermals ulti-
mately can be considered as the invisible roots of the
clouds that feed on them (Lemone and Pennell 1976).
Therefore, a mass-flux description of these thermals
allows for a natural extension of the dry convective
boundary layer to the cloudy cores in the cloud layer.
As these cloudy cores cover typically an area of only a
few percent it is clear that an updraft–downdraft de-
composition in which updrafts have a fraction of
around 40% in the subcloud layer does not provide a
continuous description between the subcloud and cloud
layer.
That leaves us with the question how to come up with
a simple operational definition of thermals (Haij 2005;
Krusche and Oliveira 2004; Lenschow and Stephens
1980). As they are coherent spatial structures, they do
not show up in a Fourier power spectrum of w, , or q
(but neither do cloud structures). However, they can be
well identified as a peak in the global wavelet spectrum
(Haij 2005; Krusche and Oliveira 2004). This peak de-
fines the typical thermal size of 50  100 m near the
FIG. 1. Sketch of a convective updraft embedded in a turbulent
eddy structure.
1232
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64

PAGE 4
surface and which is increasing with height. Using this
length scale as a criterion, during which positive
anomalies in observed w fields have to persist, results in
a fractional area cover of the thermals between 1% and
4% (Haij 2005). These percentages coincide well with
the area fraction of buoyant updrafts in the cloudy
cores in the case of a cloud-topped boundary layer (Sie-
besma and Cuijpers 1995; Stevens et al. 2001; Brown et
al. 2002; Siebesma et al. 2003). Observations also show
that the highest vertical velocities are predominantly
present within these thermal structures.
On the basis of these findings we define strong up-
drafts at a given height z in the LES model as all the
grid points with a positive vertical velocity larger than
the p percentile of the w distribution at that height (van
Ulden and Siebesma 1997). This p-percentile velocity
wp%(z) is defined as the vertical velocity for which ex-
actly a percentage p of the distribution contains grid
points with a vertical velocity larger than wp%(z) at
height z. Thus the strong updraft ensemble at a height
z is simply defined as all the grid points that obey the
condition w(x, y, z)  wp%(z). Since we use values for
p of the order of 1% to 5% (see section 3), this defini-
tion is in line with observations of thermals analyzed
with wavelets (Haij 2005), and it provides an appropri-
ate matching with the cloudy cores that feed on these
thermals. We anticipate that the mass-flux contribution
for the convective boundary layer with this decompo-
sition will not be so dominant in (5) as in the case for
cloudy cores in the cloud layer. It is exactly for this
reason that we will not ignore the first term of the rhs
of (5) in the present model.
Finally, note that (5) has the same format as the origi-
nal countergradient formulation (1). In the present for-
mulation, however, the nonlocal flux is described ex-
plicitly by a mass-flux term.
3. LES experiments
The LES code used here is the one described in
Cuijpers and Duynkerke (1993) and Siebesma and
Cuijpers (1995). The basic equation sets are formulated
within the Boussinesq formulation. The advection
terms are numerically solved using a second order cen-
tered difference scheme and for the subgrid-scale tur-
bulence a 11⁄2-order closure scheme is employed for
which an additional prognostic equation for the subgrid
turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) is solved. The simula-
tions are performed on a numerical domain of 100 
100  150 grid points using a uniform grid spacing of
x  y  50 m and z  20 m. In this study only dry
free convective flows are considered. A series of six
LES runs were carried out with different heat surface
fluxes ws  Q* and different initial lapse rates
(/z)  	 (see Table 1). All runs start with the same
surface potential temperature of 297.2 K and surface
pressure that is set to a value of 1000 mb. The mean
horizontal wind is set to zero in these simulations. Case
1 (see Table 1) is related to a previous intercomparison
case of LES codes for the dry convective boundary
layer (Nieuwstadt et al. 1991).
As an example, the mean profiles of potential tem-
perature of case 1 are shown in Fig. 2 with time inter-
vals of 2 h along with the initial profile. Besides the
obvious deepening of the convective boundary layer,
one can also observe an increasing inversion strength as
a function of time which is due to the top entrainment
process. In order to show simultaneous LES results for
different cases and at different stages of the simulation
it is convenient to nondimensionalize the results by in-
troducing an inversion height z*, a convective velocity
scale w*  (gQ*z*)1/3 (where   1/300 K1 is the
FIG. 2. Horizontally spatially averaged profiles of the LES out-
put of  for case 1 at initialization time and at t  1:30, 3:30, 5:30,
7:30, 9:30 h after the initialization time.
TABLE 1. Definition of the setup of the cases.
Case
Lapse rate 	 K km1
Surface flux Q* K m s1
01
1.95
0.06
02
2.93
0.06
03
3.90
0.06
04
1.95
0.03
05
2.93
0.03
06
3.90
0.03
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1233

PAGE 5
coefficient of thermal expansion), an eddy turnover
time t*  z*/w*, and a temperature scale *  Q*/w*.
As an operational definition of the inversion height z*
we use the gradient method (Sullivan et al. 1998). In
this method, for any location (x, y), the local inversion
height is determined as the height where  exhibits the
maximum gradient. The (mean) inversion height z* is
then simply a spatial average over all the local inversion
heights of the domain. This defines an inversion height
that is slightly higher than the more conventional defi-
nition of z* as the height where the buoyancy flux is a
minimum (see Fig. 3a). The difference between these
definitions is of the order of 5% to 10% which implies
a difference of only 1% to 3 % for w* and *. One
advantage of this definition is that it gives a smooth and
continuous development of the boundary layer height
with time (Sullivan et al. 1998).
Figure 3a shows the dimensionless heat fluxes w/
Q* as a function of the normalized height z/z* aver-
aged over the ninth hour of the simulation for all cases.
Note that the main difference for the dimensionless
fluxes between the different cases is in the entrainment
flux (i.e. the minimum value of the heat flux). Figure 3b
zooms in further on this difference by showing the di-
mensionless entrainment flux for all cases at all hours as
a function of dimensionless time tˆ  tN where N is the
Brunt–Väisälä frequency. The dimensionless entrain-
ment flux increases with time to values around 0.17 
0.2 in agreement with previous studies of the entrain-
ment zone (Fedorovich et al. 2004; Sullivan et al. 1998).
The increase of the dimensionless entrainment flux is
directly related with the sharpening of the inversion
layer with time, as measured by the Richardson number
Ri  /* where  is the temperature jump at the
inversion. The lower values of the dimensionless en-
trainment flux in the earlier stages of the runs are due
a less pronounced inversion jump. For details on the
entrainment processes in the inversion layer on the ba-
sis of first- and second-order jump models we refer to
two excellent papers by Fedorovich et al. (2004) and
Sullivan et al. (1998).
In order to characterize the boundary layer growth
for all cases, we normalize z*(t) by the growth the
boundary layer would have had in the absence of any
top entrainment. This so-called encroachment growth
ze(t) is easily calculated as (Stull 1988)
zet 
2Q*

t
12
.
6
For all cases, z*/ze converges to values within the in-
terval [1.2, 1.3] (see also Fig. 12). One of the major
evaluation tests will be whether the EDMF model and
other related models are able to reproduce values
within this interval.
As discussed in the previous section we will use p
percentiles of the w field to define the strong updrafts.
In order to display all mean and updraft profiles in one
FIG. 3. (left) Dimensionless turbulent heat flux profiles w/Q* as a function of the dimensionless height z/z* for the 10th hour for
all six cases. (right) Hourly averaged dimensionless minimum heat flux values as a function of tˆ.
1234
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64

PAGE 6
plot we subtract the minimum value of the mean profile
min and rescale the result with *. Figure 4 shows the
results for (  min)/* and (u  min)/* for p  1%,
3%, 5% averaged over the sixth hour for all six cases. A
number of observations can be made here that also
apply to the other simulated hours. The average  pro-
file is characterized by a super-adiabatic part up to 0.4
z* and a slightly stable part from 0.5 z* upward. The
updraft profile exhibits a positive temperature excess of
1  4 times * in most of the boundary layer but is
changing sign as the updraft penetrates into the inver-
sion around 0.8 z*. Obviously, the excess temperature
is larger as we increase our threshold values wp%(z)
through selecting smaller and more extreme updraft
ensembles. Finally note that the updraft potential tem-
perature is decreasing with height, which is a sign of
lateral mixing of the updraft ensemble with the envi-
ronment.
Figure 4b displays the dimensionless updraft veloci-
ties wu/w* along with the dimensionless standard devia-
tion w/w* for p  1%, 3%, 5% again for all cases and
averaged over the sixth hour. Also shown is an empiri-
cal expression for w based on a combination of atmo-
spheric data, tank measurements, and LES data
(Holtslag and Moeng 1991)
w
w*
 1.3
u*
w*
3
 0.6
z
z*
131 
z
z*
12
,
7
where we use, in the absence of a mean horizontal
wind, u*  0. The agreement in the boundary layer is
good while the nonzero contributions for w above the
boundary layer is probably due to unphysical reflec-
tions that create waves that are not adequately damped
by the sponge layer of the model. It can be observed
that the updraft vertical velocity profiles scale well with
w with a proportionality factor   (w/wu)2  0.15.
This value is smaller than one would expect by assum-
ing that the PDF of w is Gaussian. This is due to the fact
the PDF of w is positively skewed (Wyngaard and
Moeng 1992).
4. Eddy-diffusivity mass-flux parameterization for
the convective boundary layer
In this section, we will use the LES results of the
previous section to design a parameterization for tur-
bulent heat transport in the convective boundary layer.
Our starting point is (5). Therefore, our aim is to con-
struct the simplest possible parameterization for the up-
draft fields  ∈{, q
}; that is, to find an eddy-diffusivity
K and a mass-flux M that are capable of realistically
reproducing the time evolution of the boundary layer
and the internal structure. We will also set up a param-
eterization for the updraft velocity wu and use the
height where this velocity approaches zero as a measure
for the boundary layer height z*.
FIG. 4. (left) LES results of (  min)/* averaged over the sixth hour of the simulation along with updraft fields (u  min)/* for
p  1%, 3%, 5% for all cases. (right) LES results of the updraft vertical velocity for p  1%, 3%, 5% along with an LES profile of
w rescaled with w*. The line corresponds with the empirical expression (7).
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1235

PAGE 7
a. The updraft model
The steady-state updraft budget equations for an ar-
bitrary field  within the mass-flux approximation are
well known (Tiedtke et al. 1988; Siebesma and Holtslag
1996) and can be written as
1
M
M
z    	
8
Mu
z
 M  	Mu  auFu,
9
where  and  denote the fractional entrainment and
detrainment rates, and Fu contains all the external
source and sink terms of the field  in the updraft area
au. For   u we set Fu  0; that is, we assume no
effects due to radiation and advection, so substitution
of (8) in (9) gives a simple entraining updraft equation
u
z  u  .
10
For the updraft velocity, the pressure and the buoyancy
term are the two main source terms (Schumann and
Moeng 1991)
Fwu   
1 p
z  g,u  
 P  B,
11
where the term p represents the part of the pressure
that remains after subtracting the static pressure that
obeys hydrostatic equilibrium. Within the spirit of the
mass-flux approximation, we have neglected the pres-
sure fluctuations within the updraft in (11). Substituting
the forcing (11) in (9), using the definition of the mass-
flux and rearranging terms gives the following steady-
state budget equation for the vertical velocity

1
2
wu
2
z  wwu
2  B  P  0,
12
where the first term represents a transport term (T),
the second term the entrainment term (E), and the last
two terms represent the buoyancy and the pressure gra-
dient term.
Note that we attached a w subscript to the fractional
entrainment rate in (12) to indicate that the fractional
entrainment rate of w can, in principle, be different
from the entrainment rate of  (de Roode and Brether-
ton 2003). The pressure term can conveniently be ex-
pressed in terms of the vertical velocity variance (Schu-
mann and Moeng 1991)
P  
1

p
z 
w2
z 
wu
2
z
,
13
where, in the last step, we have made use of the fact
that w2
u scales well with the vertical velocity variance
with a proportionality factor   0.15 as discussed in the
previous section. Finally, we assume that the fractional
entrainment rate for the vertical velocity w is propor-
tional to the fractional entrainment rate for ; that is,
w  b.
14
Substituting (14) and (13) into the vertical updraft ve-
locity equation (12) gives
1
2 1  2
wu
2
z  bwu
2  B.
15
Note that this vertical velocity equation has the same
form as the one proposed by Simpson and Wiggert
(1969) for cloudy plumes and which is widely used in
moist convection parameterizations. The physical inter-
pretation of the terms, however, is quite different.
The fractional entrainment rate  is diagnosed using
LES results for  and u in (10). For the sixth hour we
show in Fig. 5 the dimensionless fractional entrainment
rate z* for p  1%, 3%, 5% for all cases. Although
some systematic spread can be observed for these three
definitions, the points collapse reasonably well on a
single parabolic curve that can be well fitted with
  c
1
z 
1
z*  z
16
FIG. 5. LES results for the nondimensionalized reciprocal frac-
tional entrainment rates 1/(z*) diagnosed using (10) for p  1%,
3%, 5% for all six cases averaged over the sixth hour. The full line
represents the parameterized form (16).
1236
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64

PAGE 8
with c  0.4. This parabolic shape, already proposed in
van Ulden and Siebesma (1997), strongly suggests that
the entrainment length scale 1(z) is determined by
the dominant eddy size at height z (see also Fig. 1).
Such an identification also explains the strong resem-
blance between 1 and the length scale used in TKE
schemes (Cuxart et al. 2000; Bougeault and Lacarrère
1989; Teixeira et al. 2004). The use of (10) to diagnose
 becomes ill defined when the excess has a zero cross-
ing. This explains the scatter of the diagnosed value of
 in Fig. 5 around the inversion.
The   z1 behavior near the surface has been re-
ported recently also, based on LES results, for a simple
updraft–downdraft decomposition (de Roode et al.
2000). The z1 scaling has the advantage that the pre-
cise choice of the initialization height z1 becomes irrel-
evant in the limit of a neutral boundary layer. More
precisely, if  has a logarithmic profile, it is easy to
show, using (10) that for   z1 the excess u  
becomes height independent (see appendix A). For the
present cases, which are in the free convective limit,  is
described by a power law in the surface layer. In that
case, there is still a small dependency of the tempera-
ture excess, but still much smaller than in the case of a
nonentraining adiabatic ascending plume.
Next we will evaluate the vertical velocity budget
equation (12) with the LES results in its parameterized
form. For the pressure term we use the right-hand side
of (13), for the mixing term we use (14) along with the
fit (16) for . We finally close the budget equation (12)
of w by solving for b at each height level that is the
remaining undetermined parameter [see (14)]. The
budget terms are nondimensionalized by w2
*/z* and
shown in the left panel of Fig 6. This allows averages to
be shown over the sixth hour of the budget equation for
all six cases. It can be observed that the most important
source term for the updraft vertical velocity is the buoy-
ancy term. The entrainment term is a remarkable con-
stant sink term while the pressure term is a source term
in the lower half of the boundary layer and a sink term
in the upper half. Overall the sum of the three budget
terms (B, P, E) generate a net source term in the lower
part of the boundary layer and a net sink term in the
upper part. This is compensated by the transport term
T, reflecting the fact that kinetic energy is transported
from the lower half to the upper half of the boundary
layer by the nonlocal strong thermals.
The diagnosed profile of the scaling factor b is dis-
played in Fig. 6b. The fact that the diagnosed value of
b is rather independent of height and time is a justifi-
cation for the assumption that w can be scaled with  by
a constant factor. The result suggests b  0.5, a value
that we will adopt in the parameterization and the one-
column simulations in the next section.
FIG. 6. (a) Nondimensionalized budget terms of the updraft velocity equation (12) as a function of the relative height for all cases
averaged over the sixth hour, where T is the transport term, E is the entrainment term, B is the buoyancy term, and P is the pressure
gradient term. (b) The corresponding diagnosed entrainment scaling parameter b [see (14)].
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1237

PAGE 9
Finally, we initialize the updraft model by taking the
mean value at the lowest model level z1 and adding an
excess that scales with the surface flux (Troen and
Mahrt 1986)
uz1  z1  
Q*
wz1 ,
17
where ws is the surface flux. For the standard devia-
tion w we use the empirical expression (7). The value
of the prefactor  again is based on LES results that
suggest   1. Note that this value is much smaller than
the value of   8 originally proposed in (Troen and
Mahrt 1986).
This completes the updraft model that calculates,
given the surface fluxes and the mean profiles, the up-
draft fields of u, qu, and wu, and the inversion height
z*, the latter being the height where wu vanishes.
b. Eddy diffusivity and mass flux parameterization
To complete the EDMF approach (5) we need to
specify the eddy diffusivity K and the mass flux M. A
simple and robust method for the convective boundary
layer is to use a profile method (Troen and Mahrt 1986)
and we will do so accordingly. A so-called K profile
should at least
• obey surface layer similarity near z  0,
• vanish near the inversion,
• exhibit a peak value Kmax/(w*z*)  0.1.
Holtslag (1998) proposed a K-profile Kh for heat and
moisture that obeys these constraints that we will adopt
here. In a nondimensionalized form it reads
Kˆ h 
Kh
z*w*
 k
u*
w*
h0
1 z
z*1 
z
z*
2
,
18
with k the von Kármán’s constant and h0 an effective
stability function given by
h0 1  39
z
L
13
,
19
where L is the Obukhov length. Eliminating the
Obukhov length in terms of z* and w* finally gives
Kˆ h  k
u*
w*
3
 39k
z
z*
13 z
z*1 
z
z*
2
.
20
Note that (20) is about proportional to the product of
w as given by (7) and a length scale similar to the one
given by (16). This observation illustrates the analogy
between the present K-profile method and methods in
which the eddy-diffusivity is estimated as a product of a
length scale and a velocity scale. Since surface layer
similarity determines the surface fluxes and the updraft
model determines the inversion height z*, (20) com-
pletely determines the eddy diffusivity profile.
The mass-flux M  auwu is directly proportional to
wu since au is constant by definition. This allows the
mass flux to scale with the standard deviation w (see
Fig. 4b)
M  cmw,
21
with cm  0.3 and where we use the parameterized form
(7) for w. Alternatively one can also directly use the
definition of the mass flux M  auwu and use the up-
draft velocity equation (15) (Soares et al. 2004).
c. Implementation of the scheme
An often-undervalued aspect of any parameteriza-
tion is its numerical implementation. The numerical
challenge of the present scheme is how to discretize the
time evolution equation (2) due to turbulent mixing as
estimated by the present EDMF approach (5) for  ∈
{, q
}


t
mix
 
w
z
 

zK

z  Mu  .
22
In order to solve this advection–diffusion equation in a
consistent manner, a full advection–diffusion solver is
used. The diffusion and the mass-flux coefficients can
be quite large when compared with the time step and
vertical grid space typically used in climate and NWP
models. In fact, these coefficients often exceed the nu-
merical stability limits for both the diffusion and advec-
tion explicit schemes. Because of this, the typical tur-
bulent diffusion equation in climate and NWP models is
generally solved in an implicit manner (Girard and
Delage 1990; Beljaars 1991).
The advective mass-flux transport, however, is usu-
ally treated in an explicit manner, although it has been
shown that the mass-flux term violates the stability cri-
terion on a regular basis (Jakob and Siebesma 2003). In
order to address these stability problems, the mass-flux
and diffusion terms in the present scheme are solved
simultaneously in an implicit manner according to an
algorithm already tested in the European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) model
(Teixeira and Siebesma 2000). For details on the nu-
merical discretization of (22), we refer to appendix B.
1238
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64

PAGE 10
5. Single-column model results
a. Reference case
We will proceed by using case 1 as described in sec-
tion 3 to evaluate the EDMF parameterization. Al-
though this case has been used to design the param-
eterization, it is still a useful test since it answers the
question to which extent the mean turbulent transport
in three dimensions can be faithfully represented in one
dimension. To this purpose a single-column model
(SCM) with the above-described EDMF scheme has
been developed. For the time stepping the implicit
scheme described in appendix B is used. The values of
the constants in the reference case are based on the
LES results discussed in the previous section and which
are summarized in Table 2.
In order to exclude possible errors due to a too-
coarse resolution we use in the reference run the same
high vertical resolution of 20 m as in the LES model.
Additionally we also repeat the same experiment with a
coarser resolution to assess to what extend the param-
eterization is sensitive to the used vertical resolution.
This low-resolution run uses the same resolution as in
the 60-level operational ECMWF model (Teixeira
1999). For the present simulations, only the lowest thir-
teen levels are active, which are at about 10, 35, 75, 125,
200, 295, 410, 560, 730, 930, 1165, 1430, 1725, and 2050
m.
The boundary layer growth is critically dependent on
the model formulation of the inversion height z* be-
cause of the use of a K-profile method. Therefore care
is needed to determine z* on a discretized grid in order
to avoid possible resolution dependencies. Therefore,
two modifications to the model formulation are added.
First the inversion height z*, defined as the height at
which the vertical velocity vanishes, is determined by
finding the zero-crossing of the updraft velocity by in-
terpolation between the highest level with a positive wu
and the subsequent level that has a negative vertical
velocity. This allows a smooth growth of the boundary
layer height. Second, since near the inversion the en-
trainment term becomes increasingly important, we
propose a modified formulation of the lateral entrain-
ment to reduce the resolution sensitivity
  c
1
z  z 
1
z*  z  z,
23
where z represents the vertical grid size where  is
evaluated. Note that in the limit of high-resolution
z →0 the original formulation (16) is recovered. The
addition of the factor z assures the entrainment near
the inversion can never exceed c/z, which is a rea-
sonable upper limit for the grid-averaged lateral en-
trainment near the inversion.
Since we do not want that any spinup effects of the
LES model runs influence the evaluation, we initialize
the SCM with mean profiles of the LES model after 0.5
h of simulation (see Fig. 7a). Figure 7a shows the SCM
results after 5 and 10 h of simulation along with the
corresponding LES results. It can be observed that the
temperature evolution of the boundary layer is well
reproduced by the SCM, also in the low-resolution
mode. This suggests that the boundary layer growth
and the top-entrainment process are well captured by
the SCM. This hint is confirmed in Fig. 7b where the
boundary layer (BL) height evolution of the SCM is
shown and compared with the LES results. The wiggled
structure of the BL height growth for the low resolution
is the only remnant of the coarse resolution.
Figure 7c focuses more on the internal dynamics of
the model. Figure 7c evaluates the nondimensionalized
updraft velocity after 10 h of simulation. This result
indicates that the updraft model is not only producing
the correct boundary layer growth but also the proper
updraft characteristics. Finally, in Fig. 7d, the nondi-
mensionalized resulting heat flux after 10 h of simula-
tion is displayed along with the flux from the LES
model. Moreover, the breakdown of the turbulent flux
of the EDMF scheme into the contribution of the dif-
fusion term and the nonlocal mass flux is shown in the
same figure. A couple of remarks should be made here.
First it should be observed that both terms contribute
to the negative entrainment flux in the inversion: the
diffusion term because it is downgradient and the mass-
flux contribution because the updraft temperature is
lower than the mean temperature in the inversion. Sec-
ond, the mass-flux term provides, except in the surface
layer, the dominant contribution to the turbulent flux.
In fact it turns out, as we will see in the next subsection,
that the precise magnitude of the eddy diffusivity is not
that relevant.
b. Model sensitivity
It is good practice to provide insight on the sensitivity
of the parameterization scheme to the used parameters.
TABLE 2. The values of the constants based on the LES results
that are used in the reference SCM run. The third column shows
the variation of these parameters to assess the sensitivity of the
scheme to these constants in section 5b.
Parameter
Reference value
Sensitivity variation
c
0.4
0.38  c  0.42
cm
0.3
0.24  cm  0.36
b
0.5
0.4  b  0.6

0.15
0.12    0.18

1.0
0.8    1.2
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1239

PAGE 11
As an integral measure for the sensitivity, the boundary
layer height after 10 h of simulation is evaluated. Each
of the parameters displayed in Table 2 is increased and
decreased by 20% and the effect of this change on the
boundary layer height is shown in Fig. 8.
The largest sensitivities are due to the parameters c
and b, which determine the intensity of the lateral en-
trainment. The sensitivity cm that determines the
strength of the mass-flux contribution is rather small.
Also, the sensitivity to the initialization of the tempera-
FIG. 7. Single-column model results with a high (dots) and a low (dashes) vertical resolution of the EDMF scheme evaluated with
LES results (full lines); (a) initial vertical profile and profiles after 5 and 10 h of simulation, (b) time evolution of the boundary layer
height, (c) nondimensionalized updraft velocity of the thermal after 10 h of simulation, and (d) the total nondimensionalized turbulent
flux, produced by the LES model (thick full line) and the SCM (thin full line) after 10 h of simulation. Also displayed is the breakdown
of the turbulent flux of the EDMF scheme into the diffusion contribution (dashes) and a contribution due to the mass-flux term (dots).
1240
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64

PAGE 12
ture excess as expressed by the factor  is small. This is
because the sensitivity is strongly damped by the lateral
entrainment of the updraft. In short, the most sensitive
parameters are those that directly influence the deter-
mination of the boundary layer height, since z* deter-
mines the growth rate of the boundary layer height and
hence the top-entrainment flux.
There is also a remarkable insensitivity to the eddy
diffusivity K that was already briefly mentioned in the
previous subsection. In order to quantify this aspect,
the intensity of the K profile (20) is also increased and
decreased by 20% without any effect on the model out-
put. In fact, we are able to reduce the effect of the K
profile by 80% without any significant effect on the
model. Similar to Fig. 7d we show in Fig. 9 the breakup
of the total heat flux into the diffusive contribution and
the mass-flux contribution after 10 h of simulation for
this reduced diffusion case. It can be observed that al-
most the entire heat flux is faithfully reproduced by the
mass-flux contribution only, except near the surface
where the diffusion is still the dominant term. One
might argue that this observation would promote a pa-
rameterization in terms of mass flux only. However, we
strongly think that the inclusion of a diffusion term is
crucial for a number of reasons. First, in the present
convective case it is true that the precise value of the
diffusion is not that important, but if we lower the am-
plitude of the K profile even further by 90% the model
becomes unstable near the surface and strong wiggles in
the separate flux contributions can be seen. In the
present convective case, the diffusion acts mainly as a
stabilizing smoothing operator. Second, the role of the
diffusion will become more physically relevant in the
case of a transition to neutral or stable boundary layer.
In that case, the nonlocal mass flux contribution will
vanish and the diffusion has to be the main mixing
mechanism. With only a mass-flux parameterization, a
smooth transition to and a proper parameterization of
the neutral and stable boundary layer will become un-
necessarily painful.
c. Other approaches
In this section, we want to confront the EDMF ap-
proach with two other more traditional methods. The
first one is the usual ED approach without any extra
nonlocal modifications. The second approach is to use a
countergradient (EDCG) term to take into account
nonlocal transport. In formula this second approach is
given by (1) where we choose for the nonlocal term 	
the formulation suggested by Cuijpers and Holtslag
(1998)
  a
w*
w
2 z*
w*,
24
with a  2. The three approaches are summarized in
Table 3. We emphasize that, in order to make the com-
parison as clean as possible, in all three cases the same
K-profile method with the same vertical velocity equa-
tion (15) is used to determine the BL height z*. This
way we can assess in a transparent way the impacts of
the classic countergradient approach and the mass-flux
contribution to the bare eddy diffusivity approach.
FIG. 8. Effect of the variation of the used constants in the
EDMF scheme as given in Table 2 on the boundary layer height
after 10 h of simulation. Note that the parameters with the strong-
est sensitivity are those that directly influence the determination
of the BL height.
FIG. 9. The same as in Fig. 7d but now with a run in which the
K coefficient is reduced by 80% with respect to the reference run.
Note that the turbulent flux is almost completely determined by
the mass-flux term and that even after 10 h of simulation the SCM
flux profile is similar to the flux profile produced by the LES
model.
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1241

PAGE 13
Again as an integral measure, we first show in Fig.
10a the boundary layer growth of all three models for
case 1. The results might appear to be somewhat sur-
prising at first sight; the ED model overestimates the
boundary layer height indicating too-aggressive bound-
ary layer growth while the EDCG model strongly un-
derestimates this boundary layer growth. In order to
explain these results we display the average profiles of
 after 10 h of simulation of the three models along with
the LES profile in Fig. 10b. Obviously, since the ED
model is apparently too aggressive, the mean tempera-
ture in the boundary layer is too high while, on the
opposite, the EDCG model underestimates the mean
temperature in the boundary layer. Figure 10b also
shows that the ED model produces an unrealistic un-
stable temperature profile. Historically, it is for this rea-
son that the countergradient term has been introduced
and indeed, as can be observed in Fig. 10b, the EDCG
model gives a stable potential temperature profile in
the upper half of the boundary layer. These shapes ex-
plain the fact that the ED schemes is more aggressive
than the EDCG and the EDMF approach: because of
the unrealistic unstable  profile of the ED approach,
the vertical velocity is fed with a too-strong buoyancy
source term and, as a result, the updraft penetrates too
deep into the inversion. This causes a too-strong en-
trainment and hence an overaggressive growth of the
boundary layer height.
This still leaves the riddle of why the countergradient
(EDCG) method is less active than the proposed
EDMF method. The reason for this can be easily un-
derstood if we again make a breakdown of (1) into the
ED contribution and the CG contribution with the for-
mat (24) for the 10th hour of the EDCG run (see Fig.
11). Because the countergradient term is always posi-
tive, also in the entrainment zone, it reduces the top-
entrainment flux. In fact, for the present case the eddy
diffusivity and the countergradient term almost bal-
ance, so, effectively there is barely any top-entrainment
left. Therefore, in short, including a countergradient
term has a profound effect of reducing the top-
entrainment rate. This explains the slow growth of the
BL height of the countergradient experiment when
compared with the EDMF approach.
This result might sound somewhat contradictory with
respect to previous claims that the nonlocal schemes
with a countergradient formulation enhance turbulent
mixing leading to deeper boundary layers than with a
local scheme without such a countergradient term
(Holtslag and Boville 1993; Holtslag et al. 1995). The
FIG. 10. (a) Time evolution of the inversion height for the three different approaches listed in Table 3 along with LES results as a
reference. (b) The mean potential temperature profiles after 10 h of simulation.
TABLE 3. List of the three different approaches to parameterize
turbulent transport in the convective boundary layer.
Name
Diffusion
Nonlocal transport
ED
K profile (18)
None
EDMF
K profile (18)
M(u  )
EDCG
K profile (18)
K	
1242
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64

PAGE 14
reason for this is that in these studies, the eddy-
diffusivity formulations used for the local and nonlocal
schemes are not the same. The reason that the nonlocal
scheme appears to be more active despite the counter-
gradient term is due to the use of an aggressive K-
profile method with a parcel method to estimate the BL
height. The present results in this study are qualita-
tively in agreement with the findings of Stevens (2000)
who found, using 1-yr integrations of the standard
Community Climate Model (CCM) version 3.2 with
fixed SSTs (Kiehl et al. 1996), that switching off the
countergradient term leads to an increase of the glo-
bally averaged BL height.
d. Evaluation of the model with the other LES
cases
So far we have limited our evaluation of the EDMF
model and other approaches to case 1. We conclude our
study by evaluating the boundary layer growth for all
six cases for the reference EDMF model, the EDCG
model, and the ED model, and compare these results
with the LES data. As already mentioned in section 3,
a critical test for these models is whether they can re-
produce the dimensionless boundary layer height z*/ze
for the limit tˆ →. As none of these schemes have
the level of sophistication to incorporate the depen-
dency of the entrainment flux on the Richardson num-
ber (see Fig. 3b), it is not realistic to expect that these
1d-models can reproduce the variation of z*/ze from
case to case.
The test will therefore be whether the abovemen-
tioned models are capable of reproducing values of
z*/ze that fall within the range of z*/ze produced by
large-eddy simulations. The LES results are shown in
Fig. 12. The thick line is the time evolution of z*/ze for
the ensemble mean LES results, while the standard de-
viation of z*/ze based on the six cases is shown as a
gray band around the mean. The results for all six
cases for the EDMF, EDCG, and the ED model are
plotted in this Fig. 12 as well. This shows that the results
found for case 1 are quite generic: the EDMF model
generates boundary layer growth for all cases that fall
within the range [1.2, 1.3] and compare reasonably well
with the LES results. The EDCG model underesti-
mates the boundary layer growth in all cases while the
ED model overestimates the boundary layer growth in
all cases.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
Convective boundary layers are ubiquitous in the at-
mosphere and they have a fundamental impact on the
physics and dynamics of the climate system. However,
due to coarse horizontal resolution, the turbulent and
FIG. 11. Total heat flux of the LES model after 10 h of simula-
tion along with the heat flux of the SCM model with the coun-
tergradient approach. Also shown is the breakup of the heat flux
in the SCM model into a contribution due to the eddy diffusivity
and a contribution due to the countergradient term 	. Note that
the countergradient contribution is working against the entrain-
ment flux. As a result, there is an almost zero entrainment flux
left.
FIG. 12. Dimensionless boundary layer–growth evaluation of
the EDMF model (thin full lines), the EDCG model (dashed),
and the ED model (dotted) for all six cases defined in Table 1
along with the LES results. These are shown as an ensemble mean
(thick line) and a band that indicates the standard deviation of the
ensemble.
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1243

PAGE 15
convective flow within the boundary layer cannot be
explicitly resolved by current weather (global or meso-
scale) and climate prediction models. Parameteriza-
tions of these subgrid fluxes are then necessary in order
to achieve some level of realism. In spite of its apparent
simplicity, due to the lack of condensation effects, dry
convective boundary layers are still a major challenge
in weather and climate modeling, in particular the rep-
resentation of the boundary layer top-entrainment and
the countergradient fluxes.
In this paper we propose a unified way of represent-
ing the subgrid vertical flux in dry convective boundary
layers, by combining the eddy-diffusivity (ED) ap-
proach (typically used for the parameterization of dry
and stratus/stratocumulus boundary layers in weather
and climate prediction models) with the mass-flux (MF)
approach (typically used for the parameterization of
shallow and deep moist convection).
The EDMF approach is based on the idea that the
MF closure is able to represent what we refer to as
nonlocal transport due to the strong thermals, while the
ED closure is able to represent the more local turbulent
transport. In section 2, it is shown that the EDMF clo-
sure follows naturally from a decomposition of the sub-
grid vertical transport into 1) the strong organized up-
drafts, and 2) the remaining environment.
In section 3, numerical simulations of the dry con-
vective boundary layer were carried out with a large-
eddy simulation (LES) model. These simulations were
used to establish the EDMF concept in a more solid
base and to obtain estimates for the parameters
needed, such as the updraft model, ED and MF coef-
ficients.
LES results were also used to evaluate the new
EDMF parameterization. When compared to LES, the
new closure represents well the evolution of the main
properties of the dry convective boundary layer. The
overall growth of the boundary layer is reproduced in
an accurate way, even when a relatively poor vertical
resolution is used. This result means that the EDMF
representation of the top-entrainment must be particu-
larly realistic. The well-mixed nature of the potential
temperature profile is achieved in a, probably, unprec-
edented manner. The linear nature of the buoyancy
flux profile, quasi-parabolic nature of the updraft ver-
tical velocity, and updraft temperature are also shown
to be realistic when compared to LES results.
Some of the current alternatives, in particular the
explicit parameterization of the countergradient fluxes,
are analyzed in some detail and compared to the
EDMF approach. It is shown that the more traditional
countergradient closures indeed reproduce a correct in-
ternal structure of the boundary layer, but at the ex-
pense of strongly underestimating the ventilating top
entrainment. The reason for this last point has been
shown to be associated with the negative impact that
the countergradient term has at the entrainment level.
Historically, to our knowledge, Chatfield and Brost
(1987) were the first to apply a mass-flux approach to
an updraft–downdraft decomposition and combine this
with an eddy-diffusivity approach for the remaining
subplumes to study scalar transport in the dry convec-
tive boundary layer. The importance of these sub-
plumes for the total turbulent transport was studied in
detail for reactive scalars in the convective boundary
layer by Petersen et al. (1999). That concept has been
further extended in a higher-order closure framework
by Lappen and Randall (2001a,b) and has been applied
to both dry and moist convection by these authors.
The present EDMF scheme is based on the ideas
from Siebesma and Teixeira (2000) and differs from the
previous studies most notably in the definition of the
updrafts: since the primary motivation for this study
was to establish a continuous formulation between dry
thermals in the convective boundary layer and the en-
training plumes within the cloud layer, a straightfor-
ward updraft–downdraft decomposition is not appro-
priate. It is for this reason that the strong updraft defi-
nition presented in section 3 has been used: LES results
show that the strongest updrafts at the top of the sub-
cloud layer actually do form the cloudy cores at cloud
base. Therefore, the main advantage of this avenue is
that it naturally opens the way for a scheme of the
cloud-topped boundary layer by allowing the moisture
in the strong updraft to condense. No switching of a
moist convection scheme is then necessary anymore. In
such a case, the updraft model is always active and
decides independently whether these updrafts become
cloud-core updrafts or not.
The present version of the EDMF scheme for the dry
convective boundary layer is part of the ECMWF
model since cycle 29.3 that became operational in April
2005. The EDMF framework also has been imple-
mented successfully in the nonhydrostatic mesoscale at-
mospheric model of the French research community
(Meso-NH; Soares et al. 2004). One main difference
with the present formulation is that the eddy-diffusivity
in Soares et al. (2004) is calculated using a prognostic
turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) equation (Cuxart et al.
2000). Let us emphasize here that the specific choice of
how to calculate the eddy diffusivity (TKE or K profile)
is important, but not essential for the principle of the
EDMF framework.
We would like to conclude with some thoughts on
how to extend this framework to the cloudy boundary
layer. In Soares et al. (2004), the extension of the
1244
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64

PAGE 16
EDMF approach to moist convection has been studied.
The updraft equations have been extended by allowing
for condensation. Above cloud base, a constant frac-
tional entrainment rate of   2 103 m1 is used and
the mass flux is determined below cloud base by M 
auwu where the updraft velocity wu follows from the
updraft equation (15), while above cloud base the mass
flux is simply diagnosed from the cloud-core continuity
equation (8). This form of the EDMF scheme has been
implemented in the Meso-NH model and evaluated
with observations from the Atmospheric Radiation
Measurement (ARM) Southern Great Plains (SGP)
site on 21 June 1997 during which a typical diurnal cycle
of cumulus convection was observed (Brown et al. 2002;
Lenderink et al. 2004).
At ECMWF, the EDMF framework has been ex-
tended by enhancing the dry K profile (20) to moist
conditions in order to allow for diffusive mixing in the
stratocumulus-topped boundary layer as proposed by
van Meijgaard and van Ulden (1998). The eddy diffu-
sivity is then based on both surface and cloud-top forc-
ing. This parameterization is operational since April
2005 and drastically improves the representation of ma-
rine stratocumulus with additional benefits to continen-
tal winter stratus (Koehler 2005). At the moment, the
EDMF framework is being extended to shallow con-
vection as well in the ECMWF model using multiple
mass-flux terms (Cheinet 2003). The EDMF approach
has also been recently successfully applied to pollutant
transport in the cumulus-topped boundary layer (An-
gevine 2005).
A number of open questions still remain that provide
an active source of research at this moment. First, there
is the issue of what to use for the fractional entrainment
formulation. Soares et al. (2004) essentially use a com-
bination of the present formulation (16) combined with
a typical constant value above cloud base that is diag-
nosed from LES studies for shallow cumulus convec-
tion (Brown et al. 2002; Siebesma et al. 2003). An in-
teresting alternative has been proposed by Cheinet
(2003) and is a combination of the present formulation
(16) and a formulation that has been proposed in Neg-
gers et al. (2002)
  max
1
wu
,
c
z,
25
where  represents the eddy turnover time. In the lower
part of the boundary layer the c/z term dominates
while in the upper part of the boundary layer and in the
cloud layer the entrainment rate is determined by
1/(wu). Indeed the fractional entrainment rate is about
inversely proportional to the updraft vertical velocity.
The simple rational behind this behavior is that slow
updrafts have simply more time to mix with environ-
mental air than fast updrafts. This formulation has the
advantage that it works in the cloud layer as well as in
the subcloud layer and, moreover, it does not require
the inversion height z* as an input variable. Second,
there is the issue of the updraft velocity equation. The
formulation (15) is identical to formulations used in
moist convection schemes (Gregory 2001) but with dif-
ferent coefficients. A similar diagnosis for the updraft
velocity equation in the cloudy core should shed some
light on this issue. Third, there is the issue of the mass
flux. For the clear boundary layer, one can use the ver-
tical velocity variance to scale the mass-flux (21) but
this scaling does not hold anymore in the cloud layer.
Using the updraft velocity wu instead (Soares et al.
2004) is an interesting alternative that automatically
provides a closure for the mass flux at cloud base that is
closely related to the mass-flux closures proposed by
Grant (2001) and Neggers et al. (2004).
Let us finally note that the present proposed formu-
lation can be extended to multiple entraining plumes.
Recent studies have shown that multiple entraining
plumes can give an accurate description of the turbu-
lent transport and the variability in both the clear
(Cheinet 2003) and the cloud-topped boundary layer
(Cheinet 2004; Neggers et al. 2002). The present study,
however, shows that, as far turbulent transport in the
convective dry boundary layer is concerned, one up-
draft equation is sufficient.
Acknowledgments. This research was initiated while
the first author, A. Pier Siebesma, was invited to work
as a consultant at the ECMWF. It is therefore a plea-
sure to thank Anton Beljaars and Martin Miller for
their keen interest in this topic. We also want to thank
Aad van Ulden for many useful suggestions during ear-
lier stages of the design of this scheme. Bjorn Stevens
and two anonymous reviewers are acknowledged for
the many valuable suggestions on a first draft of the
paper and Stephan de Roode and Geert Lenderink for
a critical reading of the manuscript. The work done by
Pedro M. M. Soares was supported by Fundacão para a
Ciência e Tecnologia (FCT) under Project BOSS/
58932/2004, cofinanced by the European Union under
Program FEDER, and by the EU Grant EVK2 CT1999
0005 (EUROCS).
APPENDIX A
Analytical Results for the Updraft Fields in the
Surface Layer
LES results suggest a power-law behavior of  near
the surface
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1245

PAGE 17
 
c
z .
A1
If we use substitute this in the updraft equation for a
field 
u
z  u  ,
A2
we obtain a general solution of the form
uz  Azc  czc zzc  1 dz.
A3
Assuming a logarithmic profile for  in the surface
layer
z  z0  c ln
z
z0
,
A4
and an excess of u(z0) of the updraft field at an ar-
bitrary height z0 in the surface layer; that is, u(z0) 
(z0)  u(z0), we find
uz  z0  uz0  c ln
z
z0
,
A5
which directly proves that that the excess of the updraft
field; that is, u(z)  (z), remains constant as a func-
tion of height. This implies that the updraft field u(z)
does not depend on the position z0 in the surface layer
where it is initialized.
APPENDIX B
Discretization of the EDMF Equation
Equation (22) is solved with the following discretiza-
tion in time
tt  t
t
 

zKt tt
z
 Mtu
t  tt,
B1
where we skipped the average bar in order to simplify
notation. The generic variable  on the rhs is taken
implicitly, but the ED and MF coefficients and the up-
draft fields are taken explicitly. This occurs due to the
nonlinear way of calculating these coefficients, which
would lead to nonlinear implicit solvers if the coeffi-
cients were considered in an implicit manner.
For the space discretization, centered differences in
space are used for the diffusion term and an upwind
scheme is used for the mass-flux term. The fully dis-
cretized version of the equation is (assuming K and M
are constant in space for notation simplicity)
zz
tt  1  2  z
tt
   zz
tt  z
t  C z
t ,
B2
where   Ktt/z2 and   Mtt/z and the term C
contains the source terms and the term that involves the
updraft values that are taken explicit in time.
Although the present model has not shown any sta-
bility problems with the resolutions and time steps that
were used, and since the different prognostic equations
can be highly nonlinear, the present quasi-implicit
scheme proposed may not be sufficiently stable for all
cases. This is actually a common and open problem in
weather and climate prediction models and in the fu-
ture more stable solutions will be necessary.
REFERENCES
Angevine, W. M., 2005: An integrated turbulence scheme for
boundary layers with shallow cumulus applied to pollutant
transport. J. Appl. Meteor., 44, 1436–1452.
Arakawa, A., 1969: Parameterization of cumulus convection.
Proc. IV WMO/IUGG Symp. on Numerical Prediction, Vol.
8, Tokyo, Japan, Japan Meteorological Agency, 1–6.
Beljaars, A. C. M., 1991: Numerical schemes for parameteriza-
tions. Proc. Seminar on Numerical Methods in Atmospheric
Models, Reading, United Kingdom, ECMWF, 1–42.
Betts, A. K., 1973: Non-precipitating cumulus convection and its
parameterization. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 99, 178–196.
Bougeault, P., and P. Lacarrère, 1989: Parameterization of orog-
raphy-induced turbulence in a mesobeta-scale model. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 117, 1872–1890.
Brown, A. R., and Coauthors, 2002: Large-eddy simulation of the
diurnal cycle of shallow cumulus convection over land. Quart.
J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 128, 1075–1094.
Chatfield, R. B., and R. A. Brost, 1987: A two-stream model of
the vertical transport of trace species in the convective
boundary layer. J. Geophys. Res., 92, 13 263–13 276.
Cheinet, S., 2003: A multiple mass-flux parameterization for the
surface-generated convection. Part I: Dry plumes. J. Atmos.
Sci., 60, 2313–2327.
——, 2004: A multiple mass flux parameterization for the surface-
generated convection. Part II: Cloudy cores. J. Atmos. Sci.,
61, 1093–1113.
Cuijpers, J. W. M., and P. J. Duynkerke, 1993: Large-eddy simu-
lation of trade-wind cumulus clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 3894–
3908.
——, and A. A. M. Holtslag, 1998: Impact of skewness and non-
local effects on scalar and buoyancy fluxes in convective
boundary layers. J. Atmos. Sci., 55, 151–162.
Cuxart, J., P. Bougeault, and J.-L. Redelsperger, 2000: A turbu-
lence scheme allowing for mesoscale and large-eddy simula-
tions. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 126, 1–30.
Deardorff, J. W., 1966: The counter-gradient heat flux in the
lower atmosphere and in the laboratory. J. Atmos. Sci., 23,
503–506.
——, 1972: Theoretical expression for the counter-gradient verti-
cal heat flux. J. Geophys. Res., 77, 5900–5904.
de Haij, M. J., 2005: Evaluation of a new trigger function of con-
vection. KNMI Tech. Rep. TR-276, 117 pp.
1246
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64

PAGE 18
de Roode, S. R., and C. S. Bretherton, 2003: Mass-flux budgets of
shallow cumulus clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 60, 137–151.
——, P. G. Duynkerke, and A. P. Siebesma, 2000: Analogies be-
tween mass-flux and Reynolds-averaged equations. J. Atmos.
Sci., 57, 1585–1598.
Ertel, H., 1942: Der vertikale Turbulenz-Wärmestrom in der At-
mosphäre. Meteor. Z., 59, 1690–1698.
Fedorovich, E., R. Conzemius, and D. Mironov, 2004: Convective
entrainment into a shear-free, linearly stratified atmosphere:
Bulk models reevaluated through large eddy simulations. J.
Atmos. Sci., 61, 281–295.
Girard, C., and Y. Delage, 1990: Stable schemes for nonlinear
vertical diffusion in atmospheric circulation models. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 118, 737–746.
Grant, A. L. M., 2001: Cloud-base fluxes in the cumulus-capped
boundary layer. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 127, 407–422.
Gregory, D., 2001: Estimation of entrainment rate in simple mod-
els of convective clouds. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 127,
53–72.
Holtslag, A. A. M., 1998: Modelling of atmospheric boundary
layers. Clear and Cloudy Boundary Layers, A. A. M. Holtslag
and P. G. Duynkerke, Eds., North Holland Publishers, 85–
110.
——, and C.-H. Moeng, 1991: Eddy diffusivity and countergradi-
ent transport in the convective atmospheric boundary layer.
J. Atmos. Sci., 48, 1690–1698.
——, and B. A. Boville, 1993: Local versus nonlocal boundary-
layer diffusion in a global climate model. J. Climate, 6, 1825–
1842.
——, E. van Meijgaard, and W. C. de Rooy, 1995: A comparison
of boundary layer diffusion schemes in unstable conditions
over land. Bound.-Layer Meteor., 76, 69–95.
Jakob, C., and A. P. Siebesma, 2003: A new subcloud model for
mass-flux convection schemes: Influence on triggering, up-
draft properties, and model climate. Mon. Wea. Rev., 131,
2765–2778.
Kiehl, J. T., J. J. Hack, G. B. Bonan, B. Boville, B. P. Briegleb,
D. L. Williamson, and P. J. Rasch, 1996: Description of the
NCAR Community Climate Model (CCM3). NCAR Tech.
Rep. 420, 152 pp.
Koehler, M., 2005: Improved prediction of boundary layer clouds.
ECMWF Newsletter, No. 104, ECMWF, Reading, United
Kingdom, 18–22.
Krusche, N., and A. P. Oliveira, 2004: Characterization of coher-
ent structures in the atmospheric surface layer. Bound.-Layer
Meteor., 110, 191–211.
Lappen, C.-L., and D. A. Randall, 2001a: Toward a unified pa-
rameterization of the boundary layer and moist convection.
Part I: A new type of mass-flux model. J. Atmos. Sci., 58,
2021–2036.
——, and ——, 2001b: Toward a unified parameterization of the
boundary layer and moist convection. Part II: Lateral mass
exchanges and subplume-scale fluxes. J. Atmos. Sci., 58,
2037–2051.
Lemone, M. A., and W. T. Pennell, 1976: The relationship of trade
wind cumulus distribution to subcloud layer fluxes and struc-
ture. Mon. Wea. Rev., 104, 524–539.
Lenderink, G., and Coauthors, 2004: The diurnal cycle of shallow
cumulus clouds over land: A single-column model intercom-
parison study. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 130, 3339–3364.
Lenschow, D. H., and P. L. Stephens, 1980: The role of thermals
in the convective boundary layer. Bound.-Layer Meteor., 19,
509–532.
Neggers, R. A. J., A. P. Siebesma, and H. J. J. Jonker, 2002: A
multiparcel model for shallow cumulus convection. J. Atmos.
Sci., 59, 1655–1668.
——, ——, G. Lenderink, and A. A. M. Holtslag, 2004: An evalu-
ation of mass flux closures for diurnal cycles of shallow cu-
mulus. Mon. Wea. Rev., 132, 2525–2538.
Nieuwstadt, F. T. M., P. J. Mason, C.-H. Moeng, and U. Schu-
mann, 1991: Large-eddy simulation of the convective bound-
ary layer: A comparison of four computer codes. Turbulent
Shear Flows 8, F. Durst et al., Eds., Springer-Verlag, 343–367.
Ogura, Y., and H.-R. Cho, 1973: Diagnostic determination of cu-
mulus cloud populations from observed large-scale variables.
J. Atmos. Sci., 30, 1276–1286.
Petersen, A. C., C. Beets, H. van Dop, P. G. Duynkerke, and A. P.
Siebesma, 1999: Mass-flux characteristics of reactive scalars
in the convective boundary layer. J. Atmos. Sci., 56, 37–56.
Randall, D. A., Q. Shao, and C.-H. Moeng, 1992: A second-order
bulk boundary-layer model. J. Atmos. Sci., 49, 1903–1923.
Schumann, U., and C.-H. Moeng, 1991: Plume budgets in clear
and cloudy convective boundary layers. J. Atmos. Sci., 48,
1758–1770.
Siebesma, A. P., and J. W. M. Cuijpers, 1995: Evaluation of para-
metric assumptions for shallow cumulus convection. J. At-
mos. Sci., 52, 650–666.
——, and A. A. M. Holtslag, 1996: Model impacts of entrainment
and detrainment rates in shallow cumulus convection. J. At-
mos. Sci., 53, 2354–2364.
——, and J. Teixeira, 2000: An advection-diffusion scheme for the
convective boundary layer: Description and 1d-results. Proc.
14th Symp. on Boundary Layers and Turbulence, Aspen, CO,
Amer. Meteor. Soc., 133–136.
——, and Coauthors, 2003: A large eddy simulation intercompari-
son study of shallow cumulus convection. J. Atmos. Sci., 60,
1201–1219.
Simpson, J., and V. Wiggert, 1969: Models of precipitating cumu-
lus towers. Mon. Wea. Rev., 97, 471–489.
Soares, P. M. M., P. M. A. Miranda, A. P. Siebesma, and J. Teix-
eira, 2004: An eddy-diffusivity/mass-flux parameterization
for dry and shallow cumulus convection. Quart. J. Roy. Me-
teor. Soc., 130, 3365–3384.
Stevens, B., 2000: Quasi-steady analysis of a PBL model with an
eddy-diffusivity profile and nonlocal fluxes. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
128, 824–836.
——, and Coauthors, 2001: Simulations of trade wind cumuli un-
der a strong inversion. J. Atmos. Sci., 58, 1870–1891.
Stull, R. B., 1988: An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorol-
ogy. Kluwer Academic, 666 pp.
Sullivan, P. P., C.-H. Moeng, B. Stevens, D. H. Lenschow, and
S. D. Mayor, 1998: Structure of the entrainment zone capping
the convective atmospheric boundary layer. J. Atmos. Sci., 55,
3042–3064.
Teixeira, J., 1999: The impact of increased boundary layer vertical
resolution on the ECMWF forecast system. ECMWF Tech.
Rep. 268, 55 pp.
——, and A. P. Siebesma, 2000: A mass-flux/K-diffusion approach
to the parameterization of the convective boundary layer:
Global model results. Proc. 14th Symp. on Boundary Layers
and Turbulence, Aspen, CO, Amer. Meteor. Soc., 231–234.
——, J. P. Ferreira, P. M. A. Miranda, T. Haack, J. Doyle, A. P.
Siebesma, and R. Salgado, 2004: A new mixing-length for-
mulation for the parameterization of dry convection: Imple-
mentation and evaluation in a mesoscale model. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 132, 2698–2707.
APRIL 2007
S I E B E S M A E T A L .
1247

PAGE 19
Tiedtke, M., W. A. Hackley, and J. Slingo, 1988: Tropical fore-
casting at ECMWF: The influence of physical parameteriza-
tion on the mean structure of forecasts and analyses. Quart. J.
Roy. Meteor. Soc., 114, 639–664.
Troen, I., and L. Mahrt, 1986: A simple model of the atmospheric
boundary layer: Sensitivity to surface evaporation. Bound.-
Layer Meteor., 37, 129–148.
van Meijgaard, E., and A. P. van Ulden, 1998: A first order mix-
ing-condensation scheme for nocturnal stratocumulus. At-
mos. Res., 45, 253–273.
van Ulden, A. P., and A. P. Siebesma, 1997: A model for strong
updrafts in the convective boundary layer. Preprints, 12th
Symp. on Boundary Layers and Turbulence, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, Amer. Meteor. Soc, 257–259.
Wang, S., and B. A. Albrecht, 1990: A mean-gradient model of
the dry convective boundary layer. J. Atmos. Sci., 47, 126–
138.
Wyngaard, J. C., and C.-H. Moeng, 1992: Parameterizing turbu-
lent diffusion through the joint probability density. Bound.-
Layer Meteor., 60, 1–13.
Yanai, M., S. Esbensen, and J.-H. Chu, 1973: Determination of
bulk properties of tropical cloud clusters from large-scale
heat and moisture budgets. J. Atmos. Sci., 30, 611–627.
1248
J O U R N A L O F T H E A T M O S P H E R I C S C I E N C E S
VOLUME 64
